[decision] internal cache (#4641)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/decisions/1_in_discussion/copy_on_write.md

# Copy On Write

## Problem

One of Elektra's core goals is low memory usage.
Currently, there are many places within Elektra where keys and keysets are duplicated and copied around.

> Most of those copied keys are never modified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of those copied keys are never modified, but are required to be detached from the lifetime of the original instance.
```

We want to introduce an in-memory copy-on-write mechanism to lower our memory usage.

In the near future, Elektra will also gain facilities for [change tracking](../0_drafts/change_tracking.md) and session recording, both of which will potentially again duplicate keys.
There are also aspirations to create a new, simple [internal cache](../1_in_discussion/internal_cache.md) that would also benefit from a copy-on-write mechanism.

## Constraints

> 1. Elektra's public API should require no changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Currently we do not make any API guarantees, so all changes are possible. The only restriction is that we must be able to update the whole codebase to the new API with reasonable effort. However, that is always an implied constraint, so we don't need to mention it.

A few more points regarding API changes:
1. My thesis is about migrating Elektra to a new API, so I would help with API changes
2. As part of that I'm working on a tool to automate the migrations. So if I can automate the API updates, even big API changes are possible.
3. There are already quite a few proposed API changes, including a somewhat stalled decision to change even `keyNew`. Please don't hesitate to propose something that needs big API changes. There might be a way to make it work.

> 2. Modifying keys and keysets returned by `kdbGet` should work as expected

Reviewer: What is expected? Without defining that the constraint is meaningless.

## Assumptions

## Considered Alternatives

### `mmapstorage`-like copy-on-write implementation

There is already some kind of copy-on-write semantics within `libelektra-core` to support the `mmapstorage` plugin.
We can build on this and add a more generic copy-on-write to it.

```c
Key * key = keyNew ("dir:/something", KEY_VALUE, "my value", KEY_END);
keyCopy (key_dup, key, ELEKTRA_CP_COW);
assert (keyString(key) == keyString(key_dup));
keySetString (key_dup, "other value"); // COW done here
assert (keyString(key) != keyString(key_dup));
assert (keySetName (key_dup, "dir:/valid") == -1); // must fail, as we have a COW key
assert (keyName(key) == keyName(key_dup)); // stays always valid
```

This is already implemented for the MMAP cache, so the implementation should be straightforward:
Do the same COW duplications as done for MMAP but with a different flag.

> @kodebach wrote:
> 
> > What I wanted to say is that mmap already does COW, so we can reuse the code and probably the flag.
> > If there is some code that is only needed for mmap and not COW, we could make mmap set two flags one for mmap and one for the general COW code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Don't think that's needed

  ```c
  Key * originalKey;
  Key * copiedKey;
  keyCopy (copiedKey, originalKey, ELEKTRA_CP_COW);

  assert (keyString (copiedKey) == keyString (originalKey));
  assert (keyName (copiedKey) == keyName (originalKey));

  keyDel (originalKey);

  keyString (copiedKey); // Error! Original value has been deleted. Pointer to data in copiedKey points to freed memory
  keyName (copiedKey);   // Error! Original name has been deleted.
  ```

  Triggering the update problem:

  ```c
  Key * originalKey;
  Key * copiedKey;
  keyCopy (copiedKey, originalKey, ELEKTRA_CP_COW);

  assert (keyString(copiedKey) == keyString(originalKey));
  keySetString (originalKey, "new value!");

  keyString(copiedKey); // Error! Original value has been deleted. Pointer to data in copiedKey points to potentially freed memory
  ```

  The same problems in principle exist for `mmapstorage` where `kdbSet` frees (`munmap`) the keyset.
  We can still let users access the flag `ELEKTRA_CP_COW`, we just need to clearly document what is forbidden.
  Maybe set the `KEY_FLAG_RO_VALUE` on the original key, so that the API itself detects the error.
  There is, however, no flag for `keyDel` that we could set.

> #### Changes to `libelektra-core`

Reviewer: Unless anybody sees significant advantages in this approach over the "full-blown COW" approach, I think we can consider this a "discarded idea" and mark it as such. Unlike the `mmap` idea above, here it is not obvious that the idea has downsides, or why it is inferior to the "full-blown COW". It sounds like this idea would solve everything.

A `keyCopy()` without `KEY_CP_COW` from an COW key will create a deep copy of the key.
These keys are "normal" non-COW keys and can live on their own.

Every `key*()` method that modifies data on a COW-copied key will need to allocate new memory for this data and remove the `KEY_FLAG_COW_DATA` flag.
Every `key*()` method that modifies the name of a COW-copied key will need to allocate new memory for this name and remove the `KEY_FLAG_COW_NAME` flag.
Every `key*()` method that modifies metadata needs to make sure that the same happens for metakeys.

Keysets are not copy-on-write.
A `ksDeepDup()` of a keyset with COW keys will create a keyset with deep-copied non-COW keys.
Internally we may need a `ksCowDup()` function to create a keyset with copy-on-write keys from another keyset.
Whether this function will be part of the public API is a point for discussion.

### Full-blown copy-on-write implementation

Make Elektra's `Key` and `KeySet` data structures copy-on-write.
This requires some major refactoring of code within `libelektra-core`.
Code that does only interact with the data structures via the public `libelektra-core` API should not notice any differences.

> The `mmapstorage` plugin needs to be fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `mmapstorage` plugin needs to be updated.
```

      else if `dest->data->size` > 0 (meaning there are already keys in this keyset):
        decrease `dest->data->refs` by 1.
        allocate new `dest->data`
        copy the keys from old to `dest->data`
        copy the keys of `source->data->array` over to `dest->data->array`
  ```
- `ksAppendKey(dest, key)`:

  - Pretty much the same `ksAppend()` but only for a single key
  - if `dest->data` is NULL, allocate `dest->data` and put the key there

- `ksClear(dest)`:

  ```
  if `dest->data->refs` == 0 (meaning no other keysets points to it):
    deletes the keys in `dest->data`
  else if `dest->data->refs` > 0: (there are other keysets sharing the same data):
    decrease `dest->data->refs` by 1
    point `dest->data` to NULL
  ```

- `ksCut(dest, key)`:
  ```
  if `dest->data->refs` == 0 (meaning no other keysets points to it):
    perform the cutting algorithm directly on these keys
  else if `dest->data->refs` > 0: (there are other keysets sharing the same data):
    decrease `dest->data->refs` by 1
    create a new `dest->data`
    copy over the non-cut keys into `dest->data` from the old `dest->data`
  ```

> - `ksPop(dest)`:

Reviewer: Will be removed soon

  ```
  if `dest->data->refs` == 0 (meaning no other keysets points to it):
    pop the last key directly on the keys
  else if `dest->data->refs` > 0: (there are other keysets sharing the same data):
    decrease `dest->data->refs` by 1
    create a new `dest->data`
    copy over all but the last keys from the old `dest->data`
  ```

- `ksLookup()`:

>   - if the `DEL` or `POP` flag is specified, do the COW-stuff as described multiple times now in the operations above

Reviewer: Those flags will be removed soon. The replacement is `elektraKsPopAtCursor` (but will be renamed).

#### Optimizations

> This approach requires more allocation than previously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach requires more allocations than previously.
```

> We have not benchmarked whether this is big of an issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have not fully benchmarked whether this is a big issue.
```

There are some benchmarks below...

One optimization could be an expanding "pool" of `_KeySetData`, `_KeyData` and `_KeyName`.

> We could then allocate multiple of them at the same time, and borrow and give back instance from and to the pool.

Reviewer: Good idea, but I don't see how this works without major API changes. Where does the pool come from?
